Synthetic data generation using SDV and KFP (#159)
kubeflow/blog: _posts/2025-02-16-synthetic-data-using-kfp.md

---

> title: "AI-Generated Synthetic Data, using Kubeflow pipelines"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Synthetic Data Generation with Kubeflow Pipelines"
```

layout: post
toc: true
comments: true
categories: [kfp]
author: "<a href='https://www.linkedin.com/in/aaked'>Åke Edlund</a>, <a href='https://www.linkedin.com/in/tarekabouzeid91'>Tarek Abouzeid</a>"
---

> ## Synthetic data - why and how?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Synthetic Data Generation - Why and How?
```

> 

Reviewer: First I'd outline what Synthetic Data Generation (SDG) is, what KFP is, and how they work together at a high level.

Reviewer 2: Updated

> The best results come from real data, but accessing it often requires lengthy security and legal processes. The data may also be incomplete, biased, or too small, and during early exploration, we may not even know if it's worth pursuing. While real data is essential for proper evaluation, gaps or limited access frequently hinder progress until the formal process is complete.

Reviewer: >The best results come from real data, but accessing it often requires lengthy security and legal processes.
I think it'd be good to outline what we're try ing to do here and providing context on the problem we're trying to solve.

Reviewer 2: Updated

> While the above focuses on speed and augmentation, there are more motivations for *creating* (synthetic) data.  Using synthetic data *could* give us new ways to improve on speed of development, handling biases, and more:

Reviewer: I like this sentence but I think it's missing something about what we're trying to improve. The speed of development for building models?

Reviewer 2: Thanks, updated.

> When creating insights, decisions, and actions from data, the best results come from real data. But accessing real data often requires lengthy security and legal processes. The data may also be incomplete, biased, or too small, and during early exploration, we may not even know if it's worth pursuing. While real data is essential for proper evaluation, gaps or limited access frequently hinder progress until the formal process is complete. Synthetic data, using different techniques (see below) generating data that mimics the statistical properties of real data, opens up a good number of use cases. Synthetic data, depening on technique used, not only have similar statistical base properties as the real data, but can also preserve correlations between features in the data. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating insights, decisions, and actions from data, the best results come from real data. But accessing real data often requires lengthy security and legal processes. The data may also be incomplete, biased, or too small, and during early exploration, we may not even know if it's worth pursuing. While real data is essential for proper evaluation, gaps or limited access frequently hinder progress until the formal process is complete. 

Synthetic data, uses different techniques outlined below to generate data that mimics the statistical properties of real data, which opens up a good number of use cases. Synthetic data, depending on technique used, not only has similar statistical base properties as the real data, but also preserves correlations between features in the data. 
```

- Enhancing privacy and security
- Increasing data availability
- Accelerating innovation and experimentation
- Supporting ethical and responsible AI
- Improving development speed and time to market
- Augmenting training datasets for AI models

> But, how good is it, how do we evaluate?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But, how good is synthetic data, how do we evaluate it?
```

> ### Evaluation criteria for synthetic data - how do we know it's useful?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Evaluation Criteria for Synthetic Data
```

There are many aspects to consider when making use of synthetic data, and it is important to evaluate which synthesizer is best for our specific dataset and use case.

We need to ensure a good balance between: 

  - Usability (how useful is the synthetic data for your use case), 
  - Fidelity (how similar), and 
  - Privacy (approved level for use case)

For now, we are focusing only on usability and fidelity, using framework-provided measurements for fidelity and workflows described below for usability.

> ### Methods and frameworks creating synthetic data 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Frameworks for Creating Synthetic Data 
```

> For us, open source frameworks are the only ones of interest. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Cloud-based solutions that require sending data samples to the cloud miss the whole point — some of our data cannot be sent to the cloud. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some data cannot be sent to the cloud, so some cloud-based SDG solutions are not always a good fit. 
```

For data already in cloud, we can use other cloud-based frameworks.

> Synthesizers are motivated by multiple factors, but in this context, our focus remains on generating synthetic data for on-premise use.

Reviewer: We should define synthesizer first somewher

So, what framework did we (initially) choose? Currently we are using the open source version of [SDV](https://sdv.dev/), 
an easy-to-use framework with a strong community and many useful features out-of-the-box (e.g. built-in evaluators, many modeling techniques). 
The field of synthetic data is evolving rapidly. While we do not aim to cover the latest advancements exhaustively, the use of foundational models is certainly an area of interest.

**Comments on privacy and privacy preserving techniques**

Ensuring privacy in synthetic data is a non-trivial problem, even if there
are techniques to ensure levels of privacy, it remains an active area of research. 

*Privacy problems, in synthetic data?*

> Yes, when creating synthetic data we build models, models from which we generate synthetic data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating synthetic data we build models, models from which we generate synthetic data, which can expose privacy problems.
```

> However, these models can e.g. be overfitted, resulting in leakage of the training data (the real data). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, these models can be overfit, resulting in leakage of the training data (i.e., the real data). 
```

Another challenge lies in handling anomalies. If certain information in the real data stands out and we don't account for it when creating synthetic data, there is a risk of backtracking from the synthetic data to the real.
A typical example could be 'a very rich person in the dataset' or 'a very rare disease'. 
The problem here, besides from the privacy part, is that it might be the anomalies we really are looking for.

We are experimenting with various differential privacy strategies, but it is still early days, and we do not focus on them in the examples below.

### The Synthetic Data Vault (SDV) - high level

> When you initialize and fit a synthesizer (like GaussianCopulaSynthesizer, CTGANSynthesizer, etc.), it trains a model based on 

Reviewer: Could you link to some of those syntheizer resources?

Reviewer 2: They appear directly on the landing page of (link above, the https://sdv.dev), and not sure if they (SDV) might move around their sub-links (not the sdv.dev, I hope).

the dataset you provide. This model learns the distribution of the data, capturing the relationships and dependencies between 
different features in the dataset. Below are the (free) synthesizers provided by SDV that we evaluated on each use case.

The synthesizer doesn't memorize individual records from the dataset. 
Instead, it tries to learn the underlying statistical patterns, correlations, and distributions present in the data. 

> Each synthesizer does this differently:

Reviewer: nice

Reviewer 2: Thanks :-)

- **GaussianCopulaSynthesizer:** Models the distribution of each feature using copulas and marginal distributions. 
- **CTGANSynthesizer:** Uses a GAN (Generative Adversarial Network) approach, which involves training two neural networks (a generator and a discriminator) to model complex data distributions, especially useful for discrete or mixed-type data.
- **TVAESynthesizer:** Uses a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) approach to learn a lower-dimensional representation of the data and then generate new samples.
- **CopulaGANSynthesizer:** Combines elements of copulas and GANs to capture complex dependencies.
- **PARSynthesizer:** Uses Probabilistic AutoRegressive models to model sequential dependencies in the data.

> *There are more synthesizers, also from SDV, but not all open source.* We used the first four, when evaluating optimal synthesizer for our different use cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*There are more synthesizers, also from SDV, but not all are open source.* We used the first four, when evaluating optimal synthesizer for our different use cases.
```

  </p>
</div>

### Needed environment to create synthetic data

For an efficient, automated selection of the best synthesizer, we need a number of things - from the underlying platform with GPUs and MLOps (Kubeflow).

- Kubeflow pipelines
- GPU capabilities (for performance and efficiency)
- Development (IDE) environment (for framework building and running)
- Modern data platform (MinIO, Airflow) automating the synthetic data generation datasets

#### Parallelism needed

In the (Kube)flows below, we run evaluations in parallel - one for respective synthesizer, followed by a comparison of usability and fidelity scores, selecting the 'winner'.

*Note:* In earlier version of Kubeflow we noticed that the parallelism wasn't acting as expected, waiting for all threads to complete before moving to next step. We had to create a temporary workaround for this, now solved in Kubeflow Pipelines 2.3.0.

Below, we briefly describe the base flow for selecting synthesizer, followed by one use case where we use the resulting data generator for ML development in cloud.

> ## Exploring the creation and usefulness of synthetic data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Exploring the Creation and Usefulness of Synthetic Data
```

> This is what we want to do: We have a use case, the supporting data, and developed ML model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is what we want to do: we have a use case, the supporting data, and developed ML model.
```

- How similar is the synthetic data compared to the real data (interesting for e.g. visualization use cases)?
- How well do the ML models based on synthetic data keep up with ML models based on real data?

**General validation of synthetic data technique**

> 1. Create synthetic data, save the best synthetic data generator. In this step similarity measures are created by the used (SDV) framework 'out of the box'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create the synthetic data and save the best synthetic data generator. In this step similarity measures are created by the out of the box SDV framework
```

> 2. Create ML model (in our case classifier model) both on real data, as for synthetic data. Compare performance of both models against the (same) real data testset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Create the ML model (in our case classifier model) both on real data and the using the synthetic data. Compare the performance of both models against the same real data testset.
```

<img src="/images/2025-02-16-synthetic-data-using-kfp/image-2.png" width="800">

> From above, we have an example where the final synthesizer is collected and saved. This step is used in below example, exporting the resulting synthetic data generator to cloud.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From above, we have an example where the final synthesizer is collected and saved. This step is used in the example  below, exporting the resulting synthetic data generator to cloud.
```

> ## Using synthetic data generators, to enable multiple environments without data transfer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Using Synthetic Data Generators to Enable Multiple Environments without Data Transfer
```

*Below is a usecase where we need to make use of both on-premise and cloud, without moving data to cloud.*

**Problem statement:** 

- Our data cannot be moved from on-premise to cloud.
- We need extra compute power, in our public cloud environment, to create an ML model for use on-premise.
- The ML model is to be used on-premise, on new incoming data streams (that cannot be moved to cloud)

**Solution:**

1. Create synthetic data for our on-premise environment use-cases, and - as a side product we save 
away the synthetic data generator (the pickled model used to create synthetic data). 
2. Copy the synthetic data generator to cloud

> 3. Use the synthetic data generator in cloud, creating synthetic data for training of ML model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Use the synthetic data generator in the cloud, creating synthetic data for training of ML model
```

> 4. Copy ML model to on-premise, and use it for new incoming data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Copy the ML model on-premise, and use it for new incoming data
```

> 5. Evaluate: Compare the on-premise AI model with the model created in cloud - against same test data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Evaluate: Compare the on-premise AI model with the model created in the cloud - against the same test data
```

<img src="/images/2025-02-16-synthetic-data-using-kfp/image.png" width="700">

> **Division of work, what is done on-premise Kubeflow, and what is done in cloud (AWS SageMaker)?**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Division of work, what is done on-premise with Kubeflow, and what is done in cloud (AWS SageMaker)?**
```

##### On-premise

> See above *General validation of synthetic data technique*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the above *Validation of synthetic data techniques*.
```

- Develop model on real data – for later comparison with cloud model.
- Create synthetic generators, evaluate, export best generator to AWS.

##### Cloud

- Use imported (from on-premise) synthetic generator

> - Create synthetic data, using synthetic data generator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create synthetic data using the synthetic data generator
```

> - Develop model – compare which synthetic generator is best

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Develop the model and determine which synthetic generator is the best
```

> - Increase synthetic training (if needed) and evaluation data set, to improve model performance

Reviewer: I'm not sure what you mean in this sentence.

Do you mean increase the size of the synthetically generated data for training?

Reviewer 2: Increasing the amount of synthetic data needed to improve the model performance. So, more synthetic training data, and more synthetic evaluation data - not more test data, that is still real data, waiting on-premise for comparison with the model developed using 'only' real data.

Reviewer 2: Updated to below:

- Use the imported synthetic generator (from on-premise)
- Create synthetic data using the synthetic data generator
- Develop the model and determine which synthetic generator is the best
- Increase the amount of synthetic data, to see if the increase of synthetic data improves model performance (not for sure it will, see below comment)

- Export model to on-premise

<img src="/images/2025-02-16-synthetic-data-using-kfp/image-3.png" width="500">

In some more detail below.

<img src="/images/2025-02-16-synthetic-data-using-kfp/image-4.png" width="700">

##### On-premise

- Compare real data model against synthetic data model – using real test data.

> *In the current examples we see on-par (few percentages lower performance of models created using synthetic data) performance of the ML models. We experimented with increased synthetic dataset, with minor improvements. Augmenting the training data is expected (not tested here) to have more effect when using deep learning algorithms.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*In the current examples we see near equivalent performance of the ML models (a few percentage points lower for models created using synthetic data). We experimented with increasing the size of the synthetic dataset, with minor improvements. Augmenting the training data is expected (not tested here) to have more effects when using deep learning algorithms.*
```

> # Summary, and forward looking

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Summary
```

> Clearly, above flows would be very cumbersome to build and maintain without Kubeflow. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clearly, the above workflows would be very cumbersome to build and maintain without Kubeflow. 
```

> All opensource, Kubernetes based platform, Kubeflow, SDV, giving us the needed scalability, robustness, and detailed control.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our solution is entirely open source, Kubernetes based, and uses Kubeflow and SDV to give us the scalability, robustness, and detailed control that is required.
```

The area of synthetic data generation is moving fast with the overall AI field. 

> Reports of increasing use of synthetic data for e.g. LLM training is frequent, but the application areas are many more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reports of the increased usage of synthetic data for e.g. LLM training is frequent but the application areas are much greater.
```

---
## Synthetic Data Generation - Why and How?

When creating insights, decisions, and actions from data, the best results come from real data. But accessing real data often requires lengthy security and legal processes. The data may also be incomplete, biased, or too small, and during early exploration, we may not even know if it's worth pursuing. While real data is essential for proper evaluation, gaps or limited access frequently hinder progress until the formal process is complete. 

Synthetic data, uses different techniques outlined below to generate data that mimics the statistical properties of real data, which opens up a good number of use cases. Synthetic data, depending on technique used, not only has similar statistical base properties as the real data, but also preserves correlations between features in the data. 

While the above focuses on speed of development in general, and augmentation of data to improve performance of analytical modes, there are more motivations for *creating* (synthetic) data.  Using synthetic data *could* give us new ways to improve on speed of development, handling biases, and more:

> - Enhancing privacy and security

Reviewer 2: Good point. Expanded (and added some more). Updated

- Increasing data availability
- Accelerating innovation and experimentation
- Supporting ethical and responsible AI
- Improving development speed and time to market
- Augmenting training datasets for AI models

> But, how good is synthetic data, how do we evaluate it?

Reviewer 2: Thanks, updated

### Evaluation Criteria for Synthetic Data

> There are many aspects to consider when making use of synthetic data, and it is important to evaluate which synthetic data generator technique (synthesizer) is best for our specific dataset and use case. More on synthesizers below, when looking into the framework (SDV) we selected. For now, synthetizers are statistical and (more often) AI models trained to mimic the real data. Once developed, the resulting models are used to create as much synthetic data as you find useful for your use case. 

Reviewer 2: You're right. Both generation and generator is used, but here generation is the correct one. (Generator is the (cool) pkl model that you can call - and it will generate more synthetic data as you wish). Updated, thanks

> There are many aspects to consider when making use of synthetic data, and it is important to evaluate which synthetic data generation technique (synthesizer) is best for our specific dataset and use case. More on synthesizers below, when looking into the framework (SDV) we selected. For now, synthetizers are statistical and (more often) AI models trained to mimic the real data. Once developed, the resulting models are used to create as much synthetic data as you find useful for your use case. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are many aspects to consider when making use of synthetic data, and it is important to evaluate which synthetic data generation technique (synthesizer) is best for our specific dataset and use case. More on synthesizers below, when looking into the framework (SDV) we selected. For now, synthesizers are statistical and (more often) AI models trained to mimic the real data. Once developed, the resulting models are used to create as much synthetic data as you find useful for your use case. 
```

> There are many aspects to consider when making use of synthetic data, and it is important to evaluate which synthetic data generation technique (synthesizer) is best for our specific dataset and use case. More on synthesizers below, when looking into the framework (SDV) we selected. For now, synthesizers are statistical and (more often) AI models trained to mimic the real data. Once developed, the resulting models are used to create as much synthetic data as you find useful for your use case. 

Reviewer 2: Moved, thanks. Updated

We need to ensure a good balance between: 

  - Usability (how useful is the synthetic data for your use case), 

>   - Fidelity (how similar), and 

Reviewer 2: Thanks, updated

  - Privacy (approved level for use case)

For now, we are focusing only on usability and fidelity, using framework-provided measurements for fidelity and workflows described below for usability.

### Frameworks for Creating Synthetic Data 

This post focuses exclusively on open source frameworks.

> Some data cannot be sent to the cloud, so some cloud-based SDG solutions are not always a good fit. 

Reviewer 4: suggestion: this could be a subsection around "considerations" and then include the data constraints, data privacy issues, etc.  or also could update the title to Considerations when choosing a Synthetic Data Framework

Reviewer 2: Thanks, did a change of order of the blow text, better now (I think). Updated

For data already in cloud, we can use other cloud-based frameworks.

> Synthesizers are motivated by multiple factors, but in this context, our focus remains on generating synthetic data for on-premise use.

Reviewer 4: I haven't seen yet the definition about Synthesizers

Reviewer 2: Good point. Changed order of text to fix that. Updated

> So, what framework did we (initially) choose? Currently we are using the open source version of [SDV](https://sdv.dev/), 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So, what framework did we (initially) choose? Currently, we are using the open source version of [SDV](https://sdv.dev/), 
```

an easy-to-use framework with a strong community and many useful features out-of-the-box (e.g. built-in evaluators, many modeling techniques). 
The field of synthetic data is evolving rapidly. While we do not aim to cover the latest advancements exhaustively, the use of Foundation models is certainly an area of interest.

**Comments on privacy and privacy preserving techniques**

Ensuring privacy in synthetic data is a non-trivial problem, even if there
are techniques to ensure levels of privacy, it remains an active area of research. 

*Privacy problems, in synthetic data?*

When creating synthetic data we build models, models from which we generate synthetic data, which can expose privacy problems.

> However, these models can be overfit, resulting in leakage of the training data (i.e., the real data). 

Reviewer 5: I don't know if I followed this. Is this a limitation of SDG or the problem relies only on training?

Reviewer 2: It's the problem of models memorizing what it was trained on (the real data). The goal is to create similar data, not mirroring real data. It's more complicated than that, but I only hinted about the challenges with preserving privacy. 

Updated to below. Not perfect English, even I can see that...

When creating synthetic data we build models, models from which we generate synthetic data, which can expose privacy problems.
These models can e.g. be overfitted (close, or fully, memorizing the training data), resulting in leakage of the real data it was trained on.

- Increase the amount of synthetic data, to see if the increase of synthetic data improves model performance (not for sure it will, see below comment)
- Export model to on-premise

<img src="/images/2025-02-16-synthetic-data-using-kfp/image-3.png" width="500">

In some more detail below.

<img src="/images/2025-02-16-synthetic-data-using-kfp/image-4.png" width="700">

##### On-premise

- Compare real data model against synthetic data model – using real test data.

*In the current examples we see near equivalent performance of the ML models (a few percentage points lower for models created using synthetic data). We experimented with increasing the size of the synthetic dataset, with minor improvements. Augmenting the training data is expected (not tested here) to have more effects when using deep learning algorithms.*

# Summary

Clearly, the above workflows would be very cumbersome to build and maintain without Kubeflow. 
Our solution is entirely open source, Kubernetes based, and uses Kubeflow and SDV to give us the scalability, robustness, and detailed control that is required.

The area of synthetic data generation is moving fast with the overall AI field. 

> Reports of the increased usage of synthetic data for e.g. LLM training is frequent but the application areas are much greater.

Author: Yeah sure, an example reference is added.
